Work on coordinate definitions section of doc. (#26)
campa-consortium/lattice-standard: standard/coordinates.md

---
# LaTeX frontmatter equivalent to newcommand https://mystmd.org/guide/math#math-macros
math:
  '\bfV': '{\bf V}'
---

(c:coords)=
# Coordinates

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
(s:coords)=
## Coordinate Systems

```{figure} figures/coordinates.svg
:width: 70%
:label: f:coords
:name: Floor coordinate system

> The `floor` coordinate system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `floor` rectangular (Cartesian) coordinate system
```

Reviewer 2: Added

is independent of the accelerator.  The `branch` curvilinear coordinate system follows the bends
of the accelerator. The `branch reference curve` is the {math}`x = y = 0` curve of the curvilinear coordinate
system. Each lattice element has `element body` coordinates which, if the element has no
alignment shifts (not "misaligned"), is the same as the `branch` coordinates.
```

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The lattice standard uses three coordinate systems as illustrated in the figure above. 

> First, the `floor` coordinates are coordinates independent of the accelerator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the `floor` coordinates are rectangular coordinates independent of the accelerator.
```

Reviewer 2: added

The position of the accelerator itself as well as external objects like the building the
accelerator is in  may be described using `floor` coordinates.

It is inconvenient to describe the position lattice elements and the position of a 
particle beam using the `floor` coordinate system so, for each tracking lattice branch,
a [](#s:branch.coords}  is used. This curvilinear coordinate
system defines the nominal position of the lattice elements. The relationship between the
`branch` and `floor` coordinate systems is described in section [](#s:floor). 
Lord (non-tracking) branches do not have an associated branch coordinate system.

> The `branch reference curve` is the {math}`x = y = 0` curve of the curvilinear coordinate system. 

Reviewer: Maybe it would be good here to explain that `x` is a horizontal coordinate, while `y` is vertical.

Author: Will be in new revision.

The branch reference curve does not have to be continuous and, in particular, the coordinate
system through a `Patch` element will generally be discontinuous.
 
The "nominal" position of a lattice element is the position of the element without any
[position and orientation shifts](#s:align.g)
(which are sometimes referred to as "misalignments"). 
Each lattice element has "`element body`"

> coordinates which are attached to the physical element and the electric and magnetic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
coordinates which are attached to the physical element, and the electric and magnetic
```

Reviewer 2: added

fields of an element are described with respect to `body` coordinates.  
If an element has no
alignment shifts, the `body` coordinates of the element are aligned with the 
`branch` coordinates.
The transformation between `branch` and `body` coordinates is given in
[xxx](#s:lab.body.transform).

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
(s:ent.exi)=
## Element Entrance and Exit Coordinates

```{figure} figures/ele-coord-frame.svg
:width: 70%
:label: f:ele.coord.frame

Lattice elements can be imagined as "LEGO blocks" which
fit together to form the branch coordinate system. How elements
join together is determined in part by their entrance and exit coordinate frames. A) For

> straight line elements the entrance and exit frames are colinear. B) For bends elements, the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
straight line elements the entrance and exit frames are colinear. B) For bend elements, the 
```

Reviewer 2: added

> transformation from entrance to exit coordinates is a rotation about the bend center.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transformation from entrance to exit coordinates is a rotation about the bend center of curvature.
```

Reviewer 2: added

For a [Bend](#s:bend}) element the reference curve is a segment of a circular arc as shown in
[](#f:ele.coord.frame)B. With the `ref_tilt` parameter of a bend set to zero, the rotation axis
between the entrance and exit frames is parallel to the {math}`y`-axis ([xxx](#s:floor})).
For [Patch](#s:patch}) and [floor_shift](#s:floorshift)
elements ([](#f:ele.coord.frame)C), the exit face can be
arbitrarily oriented with respect to the entrance end.
For `FloorShift` elements the interior reference curve between the
entrance and exit faces is not defined. For the `Patch` element, the interior reference curve 
is dependent upon certain `Patch` element parameter settings ([xxx](#s:patch)) and, in general,
will have a discontinuity.

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
(s:ref.construct)=
## Branch Coordinates Construction

%-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

```{figure} figures/patch-between.svg
:width: 70%
:label: f:patch.between

A) The branch coordinates are constructed by
connecting the `downstream` reference frame of one element with the `upstream` reference frame

> of the next element in the branch. Coordinates shown is for the mating of element `A` to element

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the next element in the branch. Coordinates shown are for the mating of element `A` to element
```

Reviewer 2: added

`B`.  B) Example with drift element `dft` followed by a bend `bnd`. Both elements are

> unreversed. C) Similar to (B) but in this case element `bnd` is reversed.  D) Similar to (C) but

Reviewer: Not sure it makes sense to use the word "unreversed".  I think it could be removed.

Author: Reversing elements is explained in the text body and is appropriate here.

the element's `upstream` end is the same as the element's `entrance` end 
([](#f:ele.coord.frame)) and the `downstream` end is the same 
as the element's `exit`. If the element is reversed, the `entrance` and `exit` ends are switched.
That is, for a `reversed` element, particles traveling downstream will
enter at the element's `exit` end and will exit at the `entrance` end.

The procedure to connect elements together to form the branch coordinates is to ignore 
`element body` alignment shifts and mate the `downstream` reference frame of
the element with the `upstream` reference frame of the next element in
the branch so that the {math}`(x,y,z)` coordinate axes coincide.
If there are body alignment shifts, the `entrance` and `exit` frames will move with the element. 
However, this does not affect the branch coordinate system.
This is illustrated in [](#f:patch.between). [](#f:patch.between)A shows the general situation
with the downstream frame of element `A` mated to the upstream frame of element `B`.
The {math}`(x,z)` coordinates are drawn at the entrance end of the elements and {math}`z` will 
always point towards the element's exit end.
[](#f:patch.between)B shows a line

> with an unreversed drift named `dft` connected to an unreversed bend named

Reviewer: As above - maybe we can use a word other than "unreversed"?

Reviewer: By "unreversed", you just mean the normal or default operation.  I don't think any modifier is necessary, or at most something like "nominal".  What do you think?

Author: How about using: "normal (unreversed)" ?

> `bnd`. [](#f:patch.between)C shows the same line but with `bnd` reversed. This is like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`bnd`. [](#f:patch.between)C shows the same line but with `bnd` reversed.
```

Reviewer 2: added

(in this example leaving the {math}`y`-axis invariant). This illustrates why
a reflection patch is always needed between reversed and unreversed elements.

Notes:
- Irrespective of whether elements are reversed or not, the branch {math}`(x,y,z)` coordinate system
at all {math}`s`-positions will always be a right-handed coordinate system.

- Care must be take when using reversed elements. For example, if the field of the `bnd` element in
the above example is appropriate for, say, electrons, that is, electrons will be bent in a clockwise
fashion going through `bnd`, an electron going in a forward direction through the
line in [](#f:patch.between)D will be lost in the bend
(the {math}`y`-axis and hence the field is in the same direction for both cases so electrons 
will still be bent in a clockwise fashion but with [](#f:patch.between)D a particle needs to be 
bent counterclockwise to get through the bend). 
That is, to get a particle going forward through the bend in [](#f:patch.between)D, positrons must be used.

- A `reflection Patch` that rotated the coordinates, for example, 
around the {math}`x`-axis by 180{math}`^o`  would also produce a plausible geometry.
\end{itemize}

> %---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: It would probably be good to have a MAD expert look over the sections that follow.

Author: @cemitch99 OK if you know of anybody please feel free to ask them to look at it.

the page in the figure.  For a non-zero `ref_tilt`, the rotation axis is itself rotated about the
`z_0` axis by the value of `ref_tilt`. [](#f:tilt.bend)B shows the exit coordinates for four
different values of `ref_tilt` and for a bend angle `angle` of {math}`\pi/2`.  Notice that for a
bend in the horizontal {math}`X-Z` plane, a positive bend `angle` will result in a decreasing azimuth
angle {math}`\theta`.

For a bend, {math}`\bf S` is given using Eq. [](#wctux2) with 
```{math}
:label: ustt
\begin{align}
  {\bf u} &= (-\sin\theta_t, -\cos\theta_t, 0) \\
  \beta &= \alpha_b
\end{align}
```
where {math}`\theta_t` is the `ref_tilt` angle. The {math}`\bf L` vector for a `bend` is given by 
```{math}
:label: lrztt
  {\bf L} = {\bf R}_{z}(\theta_t) \; {\bf \tilde L}, \quad
  {\bf \tilde L} = 
  \begin{pmatrix}
    \rho (\cos\alpha_b - 1) \\ 0 \\ \rho \, \sin\alpha_b
  \end{pmatrix}
```
where {math}`\alpha_b` is the bend [angle](#s:bend) and {math}`\rho` being the bend radius
({math}`\rho`). Notice that since {math}`\bf u` is perpendicular to {math}`z`, the curvilinear reference coordinate

> system has no "torsion". Note: The branch coordinate system can be related to a Frenet-Serret coordinate system but 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
system has no "torsion". Note: The branch coordinate system can be related to a Frenet-Serret coordinate system, but 
```

Reviewer 2: added

> branch coordinates are not the same since Frenet-Serret coordinates use the radial direction in a bend as a coordinate axis while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the two coordinate systems do not coincide.  Frenet-Serret coordinates use the radial direction in a bend as a coordinate axis while
```

Reviewer 2: added

> with branch coordinates the radial direction can be anywhere in the {math}`(x,y)` plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with branch coordinates the radial direction can point anywhere in the {math}`(x,y)` plane.
```

Reviewer 2: added
